# Monitor the health of your node

> alongside "how to monitor the health of your node" which should include things like open incoming ports etc

### Peer count

```
WRN 2021-05-08 12:59:26.669+00:00 Peer count low, no new peers discovered    topics="networking" tid=1914 file=eth2_network.nim:963 discovered_nodes=9 new_peers=0 current_peers=1 wanted_peers=160
```

You're probably not reachable from outside.
If you don't have UPnP or NAT-PMP enabled in your router, you need to manually forward ports.

> OK, it would seem that I had originally only opened the TCP ports, but now I've opened the UDP ports as well, this appears to be fixed. Thank you for your help Stefan.

> listenAddress: 0.0.0.0, tcpPort: 9001, udpPort: 9001, maxPeers: 160

https://www.yougetsignal.com/tools/open-ports/

### Wrong IP

```
Mar 11 13:26:39 taskset[77655]: WRN 2021-03-11 13:26:25.943-08:00 Discovered new external address but ENR auto update is off topics="discv5" tid=77655 file=protocol.nim:940 majority=Some("myIPaddressHere":9001) previous=None[Address]
```

the message is displayed regularly
when the IP is wrong

### p2p-host-ip

https://docs.prylabs.network/docs/prysm-usage/p2p-host-ip
> Many participants on the ETH2 network operate their nodes on a home network. Home networks typically have a router that provides a logical boundary between your private home network, and the public internet. While this is good for keeping bad traffic out of your network, it presents a challenge for communicating with other nodes who are also on home networks.

> In order for other participants on the ETH2 network to establish incoming P2P connections with your beacon node, a number of conditions must be met:

> Your public IP address must be known.
> The protocol (TCP/UDP) and port number (0-65535) on which your beacon node is listening must be known (Default - TCP/13000 and UDP/12000).
> All routers & firewalls must be configured to allow incoming traffic on that protocol/port combination.

### vnstat

https://github.com/jclapis/rp-pi-guide/blob/main/Native.md#monitoring-your-pis-performance
